Welcome back guys.
In this lesson and some of the subsequent lessons coming up we are going to use more and more asynchronous
events inside of a react code.
And we're also going to tackle asynchronous event handling with redux in a pretty close upcoming lesson.
But before we do that I want to take a deeper dive into some of the ways that we've been using some
of the asynchronous event handling that we actually get back from firebase as well as clarify some of
your understanding on promises.
Now the reason for this is because inside of the future applications you build or the companies you
join they may not use this live reload style of event handling that firebase has provided us using this
on snapshot and on off state changed methods that we've gotten used to inside of our application.
Now I will show you how you can do something similar to what most projects might have which is a more
promise fetch oriented API using Firebase and our existing database.
But first I just want us to take a look at understanding how it is that this live fire base style of
passing us updates and snapshots and off state changes actually works because this pattern is actually
a very common pattern inside of JavaScript world.
Not only that it's actually a very common pattern in the general computer science programming world
as a whole which is the idea of subscriptions.
Now you might have heard of something called observable as you might have heard something called our
X J S you might have even used those libraries before.
If you've used angular at all ever then you've definitely come across it.
But what it is is a pattern known as the observer pattern.
So let's take a look at what that actually looks like.
Now imagine if you will this stream of events right there's this arrow that represents a almost time
linear progress of time and then each circle here represents some event inside of this timeline this
stream of events is exactly as it is.
It's a stream which means that there are subsequent concurrent back to back events that could occur
in an asynchronous fashion.
I know it sounds really complicated.
We're using a lot of terminology here but in a really basic way you can just imagine that if there were
multiple events that were happening they just happen in a specific order.
Right.
Based on when they actually occur.
So if you were to imagine a stream of user clicks you can just see this as a user just clicked.
Right.
Two seconds later a user clicked again half a second later a user clicked maybe three seconds later
a user clicked an indefinite no time doesn't matter they click again they click again and so on and
so forth and so on and so forth.
That's all a stream of data is it's just a continuous ongoing stream of events that are happening what
an observable is is it some piece of code that wraps around this stream so that we're actually able
to do something with the value of that piece of data at each event.
So for example if you remember when we were doing are monsters Rolodex and we had an on click in order
for us to bind something to a stream of data like that.
You can kind of see that there had to be some code implemented in order for us to actually capture that
event and you can see that on this data here.
There might be some event data that we want to handle right with our code.
So all an observer is is some piece of code that wraps around this stream of events the observer is
a piece of code that essentially has three function calls on it.
It has a next call which is literally just the code that you execute whenever a new event happens an
error call is something that we do when an error occurs.
So you can imagine if there was a stream of possible API calls right to a back and of some kind.
Like what we have and let's say on the third event our internet goes down or the server crashes or something
right.
This will throw an error.
We want to have some function that handles errors if that happens and then a complete call which is
an optional call that will occur if for example the stream is finished.
Now do streams finish.
Yes they definitely can.
A stream can definitely stop emitting data.
Let's say for example we know that from our back end let's say we were getting five pieces of data in
an unknown amount of time after we've gotten all five.
We know that we don't need any more data so we can actually stop listening and shut down this stream
because we don't need to keep it open anymore.
We've got all five of our pieces of data that we needed.
So because of that the observable is capable of stopping the stream at some point.
And if we have any of these observers then they're complete calls will get called and how this happens
is through what's called a subscription a subscription is essentially a way for us to tie our code write
our Observer
using what's called a listener.
So our observer is listening to these values and we're subscribing to this observer's stream of events.
So what we do here with our Observer is we're seeing Hey observable I'm gonna give you my function calls
whenever a new event comes in.
I want you to call the next on it.
Whenever an error comes in.
I want you to call the air whenever it completes I want you to call the complete and that's all it is.
There's essentially just these three methods on a single observer that we've passed to this stream of
data and then the stream of data which is the observable we'll know.
OK.
Whenever I get a new value inside of my stream I'm just gonna give that to the next function.
I'm going to call it again what this is doing is exactly what we're doing with our off dot on off state
changed.
Call the function that we've passed to it is pretty much that next function call that we've got here
right.
And that off the on off state changed is the stream of events.
Right.
There's some indefinite stream of data on the off firebase library where it just doesn't end because
users can keep logging in and logging out and logging in and logging it with different users.
Right.
And every time that happens firebase sends us and emits to us another piece in that stream which is
that new user logged in or user logged out.
Right.
Whatever it is firebase is just sending it to us in a continuous stream.
When we pass it this function we are essentially passing in a very basic observer.
This function we've passed it is the next function.
So whenever a value comes in we run our function that we pass to it the next function you could possibly
pass that this call is actually the error call right.
We can actually pass this error functions as the second argument and do something with the error if
we want it to.
That's just what's available to us on both the off state changed as well a snapshot.
It's just different ways for us to handle our Observer pattern using the fire base library the complete
call very rarely happens inside a firebase because firebase is a live database which means that updates
can always happen.
There is no point in which firebase is like Oh technically speaking users might stop signing in or signing
out.
Which is why there's no complete callback that we can pass this but this is pretty much all it is.
The moment we pass it a function where a stance creating some listener right on this observable of off
on all state changed.
Now you might wonder why do we set this unsubscribe.
Well technically speaking our subscription never ends.
Right.
Because this stream is always open.
If we instantiated some listener here this listener exists now because it's always listening for events.
If our component on Mounts we don't care about this listener as far as this component is concerned anymore
but because the auth stream always exists inside of the auth library which is in our application now.
Once we imported it then it's going to always hold on to this listener.
What we have to do is we have to unsubscribe from it right.
We need to say hey I need you to stop listening to it the moment my component on mounts the moment our
component is off the DOM.
This component doesn't exist anymore as far as our app is concerned so it doesn't need to listen anymore.
Firestarter allows us to get back and unsubscribe.
Function that the moment we call it it will eliminate that listener so you can kind of see it as whenever
this gets instantiated it gives us back some reference.
That's a function that can get called that points to this listener that we just instantiated right here
the moment our component on mounts.
We will unsubscribe from it.
So we're saying oh get rid of that listener now.
We don't need it anymore.
So just unsubscribe and then once it does that it destroys the subscription and then the observable
just continues like it always has an observable can also have any number of listeners.
That means that we have multiple of these observers that all have different next function calls error
function calls complete function calls.
It doesn't matter.
The observable just knows that there's going to be different listeners listening to it once it subscribes.
The moment it subscribes the observer what gets a reference to this subscription and it will just call
the next whenever it gets a new value call the air or whatever gets an error and code complete whenever
a complete if at any point a cup piece of code tells the observable hey I want to unsubscribe from you.
Then the observer just takes that reference and throws it out and it's like oh I don't need the subscription
anymore right.
I'm just going to continue emitting my events and firing these function calls on all of the other observers
that are still listening to me.
And that's really all it is.
It sounds way more complicated than it does and I know even with my explanation it seems rather technical.
But that's because of the way that we have to write the code.
But that's all you got to see it as really is that it's just some stream of events that we pass some
code to it and tell it what to do whenever one of these events occurs.
That's really all it is.
And then there's a chance that we just don't want to listen to it anymore.
Right.
So we just unsubscribe from it.
Stop listening to that code hopefully that gives you a better understanding of this pattern of streams
that exists when we use Firebase now because of this.
If your application does not run either asks j ust which is a javascript library that implements the
observable pattern in the side of our application or you're not using firebase.
Chances are you're just using regular promises and in the next lesson I'm going to show you how we can
write very similar code and modify our code based so that we use promises instead of just are observable.
Listener.